.TH DNSCURSE 1 "2026-03-16" "dnscurse 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
dnscurse \- trace DNS iterative resolution step by step
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dnscurse
.RB [ \-t
.IR type ]
.RB [ \-\-timeout
.IR seconds ]
.RB [ \-\-compact ]
.I domain
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dnscurse
performs iterative DNS resolution from the root servers, displaying each
delegation step the way a full-service resolver would walk them.
Unlike a stub resolver that sends a single recursive query, dnscurse
sends every query with the RD (Recursion Desired) bit cleared and follows
referrals itself, printing what each server returned.
.PP
This makes the delegation chain transparent: you can see which nameserver
is responsible for each zone, what glue records were provided, and exactly
where resolution succeeded or failed.
.PP
By default each step is shown as an indented block.
The domain name in the header is coloured to highlight the zone that the
queried server is authoritative for (yellow), with the remaining labels
dimmed.
Colour is suppressed automatically when stdout is not a terminal.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I domain
The fully-qualified or relative domain name to resolve.
A trailing dot is accepted but not required.
.TP
.BR \-t \ \fItype\fR ", " \-\-type \ \fItype\fR
DNS record type to query.
Accepted values:
.BR A ,
.BR AAAA ,
.BR NS ,
.BR CNAME ,
.BR SOA ,
.BR MX ,
.BR TXT ,
.BR PTR .
Default:
.BR A .
.TP
.BR \-\-timeout \ \fIseconds\fR
Per-query UDP timeout in seconds (floating-point).
Default:
.BR 5.0 .
.TP
.B \-\-compact
Print one line per step instead of the full block format:
.IP
.I server-ip
.RI ( "query-name query-type" ", " result )
.PP
The final answer summary and step count are omitted in compact mode.
.SH OUTPUT
.SS Block format (default)
Each step is rendered as:
.PP
.nf
    www.example.com
      server  a.root-servers.net (198.41.0.4)
      rcode   NOERROR
      result  referral \(-> a.gtld-servers.net.
      time    45.3ms
.fi
.PP
After all steps, the resolved records are shown as a dig-style answer
summary followed by a step count and total elapsed time.
.SS Compact format (\-\-compact)
.nf
    198.41.0.4 (www.example.com A, referral \(-> a.gtld-servers.net.)
    192.5.6.30 (www.example.com A, referral \(-> a.iana-servers.net.)
    199.43.135.53 (www.example.com A, A 93.184.216.34)
.fi
.SH EXAMPLES
Resolve the A record for
.IR example.com :
.PP
.nf
    dnscurse example.com
.fi
.PP
Resolve the AAAA record for
.IR google.com :
.PP
.nf
    dnscurse -t AAAA google.com
.fi
.PP
Show a compact trace of a deeper delegation chain:
.PP
.nf
    dnscurse --compact www.github.com
.fi
.PP
Confirm that a domain does not exist:
.PP
.nf
    dnscurse nope.invalid
.fi
.PP
Use a shorter timeout for unreachable servers:
.PP
.nf
    dnscurse --timeout 2 slow.example.com
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Resolution completed (answer, NXDOMAIN, or NODATA \(em any definitive result).
.TP
.B 1
No resolution steps were produced (internal error or empty resolver output).
.SH NOTES
Queries are sent over UDP with the RD bit cleared.
dnscurse does not fall back to TCP and does not validate DNSSEC signatures.
It is intended as an educational and debugging aid, not a production resolver.
.PP
Root server addresses are compiled in from the IANA root hints file and are
updated with each release.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dig (1),
.BR host (1),
.BR nslookup (1),
.BR resolv.conf (5)
.PP
RFC\ 1034 \(em Domain Names \(em Concepts and Facilities
.br
RFC\ 1035 \(em Domain Names \(em Implementation and Specification
