.TH DNSCURSE 3 "2026-03-17" "dnscurse 0.2.0" "DNScurse Library"
.SH NAME
dnscurse \- iterative DNS resolution library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B from dnscurse import resolve, RecursionStep
.PP
.BI "resolve(" name ", " rdtype "=" \(dqA\(dq ", " timeout "=5.0" ) " -> list[RecursionStep]"
.PP
.BI "send_query(" name ", " rdtype ", " server_ip ", " timeout "=5.0" ) " -> dns.message.Message"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B dnscurse
package exposes a programmatic interface for iterative DNS resolution.
It walks the delegation chain from the root servers, following referrals
and CNAMEs with the RD (Recursion Desired) bit cleared, and returns a
list of
.B RecursionStep
objects describing every hop.
.PP
All public symbols are importable from the package root:
.PP
.nf
    from dnscurse import resolve, RecursionStep
.fi
.SS Functions
.TP
.BI "resolve(" name ", " rdtype "=\(dqA\(dq, " timeout "=5.0)"
Iteratively resolve
.I name
starting from the root servers.
Returns a list of
.B RecursionStep
objects, one per query sent.
.RS
.TP
.I name
Domain name to resolve (str).
A trailing dot is accepted but not required.
.TP
.I rdtype
Record type as a string
.RB ( \(dqA\(dq ", " \(dqAAAA\(dq ", " \(dqMX\(dq ", " \(dqNS\(dq ", etc.)"
or an int from
.BR dns.rdatatype .
Default:
.BR \(dqA\(dq .
.TP
.I timeout
Per-query UDP timeout in seconds (float).
Default:
.BR 5.0 .
.RE
.TP
.BI "send_query(" name ", " rdtype ", " server_ip ", " timeout "=5.0)"
Send a single iterative DNS query over UDP to
.I server_ip
and return the raw
.B dns.message.Message
response.
The RD bit is cleared per RFC\ 1034 Section\ 5.3.1.
.RS
.TP
.I name
Domain name to query (str).
.TP
.I rdtype
Record type as an int from
.BR dns.rdatatype .
.TP
.I server_ip
IPv4 address of the server to query (str).
.TP
.I timeout
UDP timeout in seconds (float).
Default:
.BR 5.0 .
.RE
.SS RecursionStep
A dataclass representing one hop in the resolution chain.
.TP
.B step_number
.RI ( int )
Sequence number starting at 1.
.TP
.B description
.RI ( str )
Human-readable label for the step (e.g.\& "Query root server for example.com").
.TP
.B server_ip
.RI ( str )
IP address of the server that was queried.
.TP
.B server_name
.RI ( str )
Hostname of the server that was queried.
.TP
.B query_name
.RI ( str )
The domain name sent in this query.
.TP
.B query_type
.RI ( str )
Record type as a human-readable string (e.g.\& "A", "AAAA").
.TP
.B response
.RI ( "dns.message.Message | None" )
The DNS response, or
.B None
if a network error occurred.
.TP
.B error
.RI ( "str | None" )
Error message if the query failed, otherwise
.BR None .
.TP
.B rtt_ms
.RI ( "float | None" )
Round-trip time in milliseconds, or
.B None
on error.
.TP
.B truncated
.RI ( bool )
.B True
if the response had the TC (Truncation) flag set.
.PP
.B Methods:
.TP
.B explain()
Return a multi-line, human-readable explanation of the step
including query details, response code, referral targets or answer records,
and any errors.
.SS Helper functions
These inspect
.B dns.message.Message
objects returned by the resolver.
.TP
.BI "is_referral(" msg )
Return
.B True
if
.I msg
is a referral (NS in authority, empty answer section).
.TP
.BI "get_referral_ns_ips(" msg )
Return a list of glue record IP addresses from the additional section.
.TP
.BI "get_referral_ns_names(" msg )
Return a list of NS target hostnames from the authority section.
.TP
.BI "get_cname_target(" msg ", " name )
If the answer contains a CNAME for
.IR name ,
return the canonical target; otherwise return
.BR None .
.TP
.BI "get_delegated_zone(" step )
Return the DNS zone covered at this
.BR RecursionStep ,
or
.B None
on error.
.TP
.BI "format_rrset(" rrset )
Format a
.B dns.rrset.RRset
as a list of dig-style strings
.RI ( "NAME  TTL  TYPE  RDATA" ).
.SS Constants
.TP
.B ROOT_SERVERS
List of 13
.I (name,\ ip)
tuples for the IANA root servers.
.TP
.B DEFAULT_TIMEOUT
Per-query timeout in seconds (5.0).
.TP
.B MAX_STEPS
Maximum resolution steps before giving up (30).
.TP
.B MAX_CNAME_FOLLOWS
Maximum CNAME redirects before giving up (8).
.SH EXAMPLES
Resolve a domain and print each step:
.PP
.nf
    from dnscurse import resolve

    steps = resolve("example.com", "AAAA")
    for step in steps:
        print(step.explain())
.fi
.PP
Check the final answer:
.PP
.nf
    from dnscurse import resolve

    steps = resolve("example.com")
    final = steps[\-1]
    if final.response and final.response.answer:
        for rrset in final.response.answer:
            for rr in rrset:
                print(rr)
.fi
.PP
Use dnspython integer types (still supported):
.PP
.nf
    import dns.rdatatype
    from dnscurse import resolve

    steps = resolve("example.com", dns.rdatatype.MX)
.fi
.PP
Inspect a referral:
.PP
.nf
    from dnscurse import resolve, is_referral
    from dnscurse import get_referral_ns_names, get_referral_ns_ips

    steps = resolve("example.com")
    for step in steps:
        if step.response and is_referral(step.response):
            print("Referred to:", get_referral_ns_names(step.response))
            print("Glue IPs:", get_referral_ns_ips(step.response))
.fi
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B dns.rdatatype.UnknownRdatatype
Raised by
.B resolve()
if
.I rdtype
is a string that does not name a valid DNS record type.
.TP
.B OSError
Raised by
.B send_query()
on network failures (timeout, unreachable, etc.).
The
.B resolve()
function catches these and records them in the
.I error
field of the
.BR RecursionStep .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dnscurse (1),
.BR dig (1)
.PP
RFC\ 1034 \(em Domain Names \(em Concepts and Facilities
.br
RFC\ 1035 \(em Domain Names \(em Implementation and Specification
.br
RFC\ 2308 \(em Negative Caching of DNS Queries
